The Pacific parrotlet (Forpus coelestis) is a small green parrot originating in South America. A typical specimen is 11–14 centimetres (4.3–5.5 in) long and typically weighs 30 grams or more.  Wild Pacific parrotlets are green with a dusty grey cast over the body, a bright green mask and a pinkish beak.  Legs and feet are pinkish-grey. Pacific parrotlets are sexually dimorphic:  males possess shades of blue on their wings.  Blue can vary in intensity from a bright cobalt blue to a pale, almost lavender shade of blue on American birds; the blue is almost non-existent on marbled birds, only being visible on the underside of the wing right on the joint. Male parrotlets also have blue streaks behind the eyes which is often referred to as "eyeshadow;" as well as blue rumps. Female parrotlets have no blue on the wings whatsoever but can have blue eye streaks as well as a blue rump.

Parrotlets are often referred to as pocket parrots because of their size; but they are known for their larger-than-life personalities and feisty attitudes. They are solitary birds in captivity due to their aggressive behavior towards other birds when confined, so it is not suggested to house one with conspecifics unless ample space is available.  Pet parrotlets should never be kept with other bird species due to the likelihood of aggression.
Although the base, or wild-type color of parrotlets is green, they also come in a rainbow of mutations : American Yellow, Green Marbled, American Yellow Marbled, Green Fallow, Green Fallow Marbled, American Yellow Fallow, American Yellow Marbled Fallow, Blue, American White, Blue Marbled, American White Marbled, Blue Fallow, American White Fallow, Blue Marbled Fallow, American White Marbled Fallow, Turquoise, American Turquoise, Turquoise Marbled, American Turquoise Marbled, Turquoise Fallow, American Turquoise Fallow, Turquoise Fallow Marbled, American Turquoise Fallow Marbled, Grey, American Grey, Grey Marbled, American Grey Marbled, Grey Fallow, American Grey Fallow, Grey Fallow Marbled, American Grey Fallow Marbled, Albino, Lutino Creamino, Cinnamon, Misty, Dark Factor, and Pied. "Dilute" is a term not used in parrotlets. "Pastel" was previously a term used for edging on the feathers and wings; however, the preferred term is Marbled.