The white-crowned parrot is a medium-sized parrot of about 24cm in length. It has a broad body and a short tail, with a dark brown iris and brownish-pink eye ring. The bill is yellowish with a slight green coloration. Its forehead, crown and lores are pure white with white patch on chin and center of throat. The belly is mainly green; the basal colors of feathers on the breast are green with dark blue and purplish-blue tips, and light blue at the subterminal band. This scaly effect is also apparent in the feathers on cheeks and hindneck that are basally green with light bluish-green and purplish-blue at the subterminal band. The mantle and back are soft and shiny in a reddish brown color, with green scapulars that are reddish and yellowish-brown on tips and outer webs. They have violet blue primary coverts and green greater coverts; the lesser and median coverts are reddish-brown with paler tips which gives the wing a spotty appearance. The rump and upper tail coverts are brighter green with red undertail coverts. The upper wing is covered in brown patches and pale bluish-green in underwing. The physical attributes in both sexes are similar. The juvenile has head, hindneck, and breast covered in green, with light yellowish cheeks and crown. The white-crowned parrot is widely sympatric across Mexico and western Panama. Similar species include the brown-hooded parrot (Pyrillia haematotis); it has a brown head and white lores, but no white crown, nor red undertail coverts. Its body is mainly green with visible red axillaries during flight, rapid wingbeats, and a high-pitched voice. Another species, the blue-headed parrot (Pionus menstruus) is mainly green with a bright blue head and neck, red undertail coverts, and yellowish wing coverts. The white-crowned parrot has a fast wingbeat and climbs onto branches whilst feeding. They are often in pairs or small flocks except during breeding seasons. They are very cautious and will fly away while screeching loudly when approached. Their harsh voice will screech like kreeek-kreeek or kree-ah-kee-ah during flight, but can become unnoticeable and silent in the tree canopy.