The Seychelles parakeet was about 41 cm (16 in) in length, with a long, pointed tail. The wing of a male measured 204–208 mm (8.0–8.2 in), the tail 184–187 mm (7.2–7.4 in), the culmen (upper surface of the beak) 33–34 mm (1.3–1.3 in), and the tarsometatarsus (lower leg bone also known as tarsus) 22 mm (0.9 in). The wing of a female measured 182–204 mm (7.2–8.0 in), the tail 200–261 mm (7.9–10.3 in), the culmen 29–34 mm (1.1–1.3 in), and the tarsometatarsus 20–22 mm (0.8–0.9 in).
The male was generally green, slightly paler and more yellowish on the underparts, with the back of the head, nape, and narrow stripes on the cheeks washed with pale blue. It had a broad, black cheek-stripe (also termed a band or incomplete collar) and an obscure, narrow line from the cere (the bare patch around the nostrils) to the eye. The abdomen was yellowish green, and there was a purple-red or deep maroon patch (also termed a speculum) on the wing covert-feathers. The upper side of the central tail feathers was blue with yellow tips, the tail feathers on the sides were green, and the underside of the tail was yellow. The bill was red with a yellow tip, the iris was yellowish, and the feet were grey. The female lacked the black cheek-stripe, and the immature bird was similar to the female, but with shorter tail feathers.
The preserved specimens show that the Seychelles parakeet was smaller and had shorter wings, as well as a slightly less robust bill, than the Alexandrine parakeet. While all skeletal elements of the male Alexandrine parakeet were larger than those of the male Seychelles parakeet, an x-radiograph of a female Seychelles parakeet shows that it had a larger cranium, rostrum (upper jaw), mandible, ulna (a lower wing bone), and tibiotarsus (shin bone) than the female Alexandrine parakeet, but a shorter tarsometatarsus and carpometacarpus (outermost wing or hand bone). The male Seychelles parakeet differed from the male Alexandrine parakeet in lacking a rosy collar, in that the cheeks and back of the neck were suffused with blue instead of blue-grey, in that the black band that encircled the cheeks was finer, extending to the back of the neck, and in that its underside was more yellowish. The wings and tail were shorter and broader.
The British artist Marianne North worked on the Seychelles from 1883 to 1884, where she produced at least 46 paintings, mainly depicting botanical subjects, but also some animals. Apart from a few mentions, her animal paintings from the Seychelles were neglected in the literature until 2013, when the British ecologist Anthony S. Cheke discussed them in depth and identified the depicted species. Cheke found the paintings to be a useful snapshot of the local wildlife during the period, and he located and published for the first time an 1883 painting by North of the Seychelles parakeet, which had previously only been mentioned in writing. The depicted birds were a captive male and juvenile (shown with the tropical American plant Caesalpinia pulcherrima) that had been brought to Mahé from Silhouette, kept by the British medical officer James Brooks and his wife. It is the only known depiction of the species in life, and the appearance of the juvenile is only known from the painting. While unpublished, the painting was known from North's writings, such as an 1884 account describing the birds, the only mention of this species in captivity, and the painting was purchased by a relative of hers at an auction in the 1990s. The colours of this painting are more muted than North's other paintings from this time, perhaps because of fading resulting from experiencing different conditions.